



Initial Speech-Language Evaluation Summary

Name: Edison Grant Prado   	   Evaluation Date: September 19 & 26, 2024
Date of Birth: August 12, 2019		           
Age: 5 years, 1 month

Relevant Background Information

Edison, a 5-year, 1-month-old male, was seen for an initial speech-language evaluation at Riviera Schools on September 19, 2024, and September 26, 2024. His mother served as a reliable informant, providing details through a completed case history form and a phone call with the clinician.

As per information obtained from case history, Edison was born following a full-term pregnancy via cesarean section with no complications reported at birth. His medical history was reported unremarkable, and his mother reported that he is currently in good health at this time. Furthermore, developmental milestones were reportedly achieved within normal limits.

The family first became concerned about Edison's communication skills at the end of last year. Edison is exposed to a multilingual environment, with Portuguese, Spanish, and English being spoken; however, Portuguese is the primary language used in the home and English is the primary language spoken at school. He currently resides with his mother, father, and sister, Julie, and attends Kindergarten at Riviera Schools.

Instrumentation

Formal and informal measures performed during the evaluation included the following: 
* Social Behavioral Observation
* Preschool Language Scales - Fifth Edition (PLS-5)
* Portions of the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals- 5th Edition (CELF-5)
* Oral-Peripheral Observation
* Articulation/ Phonology
* Speech-Language Sample

All measures were performed in English, as the parent reported this is the language Edison primarily understands and uses at this time. Results of all formal and informal assessments appear to be reliable. 


Outcome of Evaluation

Social Behavioral Observation:

Observation was used to assess behavioral components in various structured and unstructured activities throughout the course of the evaluation. During the evaluation, Edison presented with notable strengths in social interaction. He consistently demonstrated appropriate and sustained eye contact, readily engaging with the clinician throughout the evaluation. His ability to maintain attention to task was evident, as he focused on activities and required minimal redirection. It should be noted that extra time and repetition was required at times in order to improve understanding. Edison also exhibited developmentally appropriate turn-taking skills, waiting for his turn during shared tasks and effectively participating in collaborative activities.

Edison was enthusiastic in initiating interactions with the clinician and responded promptly to conversational prompts. His pragmatic language use was age-appropriate, as he utilized greetings, comments, and questions to engage in appropriate communication with clinician. He engaged in conversations, asking questions to seek clarification or making comments relevant to the task at hand. Additionally, his joint attention skills were appropriate for his age, as he effectively shared focus with the clinician during interactive tasks, indicating his ability to engage socially.

It should be noted that Edison's articulation and overall intelligibility are beginning to impact his social communication. During interactions, Edison was enthusiastic and eager to participate; however, when a communication breakdown occurred and the clinician was unable to understand his speech, Edison would attempt to repair the breakdown by repeating or rephrasing his message a few times. After multiple unsuccessful attempts, he would either agree with the clinician's interpretation, even if incorrect, or state, "I don't know," ending the interaction prematurely. These communication breakdowns affect Edison's ability to fully engage in more extended social exchanges and may begin to affect overall confidence.

Overall, while Edison's social skills are generally well-developed and age-appropriate, his articulation challenges are starting to interfere with his ability to communicate effectively in social interactions. Addressing these challenges will be important to ensure that his social engagement continues to develop without frustration or withdrawal from interactions.
 




Preschool Language Scale Fifth Edition (PLS-5): 

A standardized assessment of receptive and expressive language skills was administered in order to assess overall language skills. The PLS-5 is designed for children from birth through seven years, eleven months of age. It evaluates all aspects of an individual's oral language and language comprehension through the use of pictures, manipulatives, and observation. 

The test is comprised of two subscales: auditory comprehension and expressive communication. These subscales are used to evaluate how much language a child understands and how well they communicate with others.

Standard scores are based on a scale with a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of +/- 15. The following interpretation of standard scores is applicable:

Standard Score RangeInterpretationAbove 115Above Average86-114Average/ Within Normal Limits78-85Marginal/Below Average/Mild71-77Low Range/Moderate70-50Very low range/Severe50 and belowProfound

The following results were yielded:
SubtestsStandard ScoreConfidence IntervalPercentile RankSeverityAuditory Comprehension7872 to 877%Moderate DelayExpressive Communication6863 to 772%Moderate to Severe DelayTotal Language Score7267 to 803%Moderate
Delay
Auditory Comprehension - On the receptive portion of the PLS-5, Edison obtained a standard score of 78. This standard score yielded a moderate receptive language delay.



Edison demonstrated relative strength with the following receptive language tasks:
* Understanding sentences with post-noun elaboration.
* Understanding pronouns (his, her, he, she, they)
* Understanding quantitative concepts (more, most) (extra time)
* Identifying shapes (e.g. star, circle, square, triangle) (extra time)
* Pointing to letters
* Identifying advanced body parts
* Understanding quantitative concepts (3,4)
* Understanding complex sentences

It should be noted that Edison required extra time for some tasks in order to improve processing.

However, Edison demonstrated difficulty with the following receptive language tasks:
* Demonstrating emergent literacy.
* Understanding modified nouns.
* Ordering pictures by qualitative concept (biggest, smallest)
* Understanding quantitative concepts (each, every)
* Identifying initial sounds
* Understanding time/sequence concepts (last, first)
* Recalling story details.
* Identifying a story sequence.
* Identifying the main idea.

It is important to note that Edison's receptive language abilities may be higher than what formal testing scores reflect. Throughout the evaluation, Edison demonstrated the capacity to complete various tasks when provided with additional repetitions, extended time, and occasional prompting to review his responses. With these accommodations, Edison was able to correctly answer a greater number of items, suggesting that with intervention targeting these areas, Edison will be able to develop a generalization of these skills.

Expressive Communication - On the expressive portion, Edison obtained a standard score of 68. This standard score yielded a moderate to severe expressive language delay. 

Edison demonstrated relative strength with the following expressive language tasks:
* Combining three or four words in spontaneous speech.
* Using a variety of nouns, verbs, modifiers, and pronouns, in spontaneous speech. 
* Producing on four- or five- word sentence (Unintelligible)
* Using present progressive (verb + -ing)
* Using plurals
* Tell how an object is used (Responses were not grammatically correct and affected by intelligibility)

However, Edison demonstrated difficulty with the following expressive language tasks:
* Answering what and where questions (e.g. "Look at this boy. Where is he?")
* Naming a described object (e.g. "Now I want you to try and figure out what I am talking about. What do you use after a bath or shower. You dry yourself with it.")
* Answering questions logically (e.g. "What do you do when you are cold?")
* Using possessives
* Telling how an object is used

Total Language - Edison's total language scores revealed a standard score of 72. This standard score yielded a moderate total language delay.


The Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals- 5th Edition (CELF-5): 
A standardized assessment of receptive and expressive language skills was administered in order to assess overall language skills. The CELF-5 is designed for students ages 5-21 years to assess a language and communication skills in a variety of contexts.
Given Edison's grade level and the expectations for a child in kindergarten at Riviera Schools, the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals-Fifth Edition (CELF-5) was initially selected as the appropriate assessment tool. However, after administering a portion of the evaluation and observing Edison's skill development and chronological age, it became evident that the CELF-5 was not the most suitable measure for him at this time. While the portions administered are included in this report to highlight areas that may benefit from targeted intervention, these results should not be interpreted to make definitive impressions regarding Edison's overall language abilities.

Test Scaled Scores- Test scaled scores provide performance information about the language content that each test targets. Test scaled scores are based on a scale with a mean of 10 and a standard deviation of +/- 3. Subtest scaled scores that are between 7 and 13 are considered to be within normal limits. The following interpretation of scaled scores is applicable:

Scaled Score RangeClassification13 and aboveAbove Average8 to 12Average7Borderline/Marginal/ At risk6 and belowLow to very low
The following scores were obtained:

TestScaled ScoreInterpretationSentence Comprehension1Very LowLinguistic Concepts5LowWord Structure5LowWord Classes7Borderline
Sentence Comprehension- The Sentence Comprehension subtest is used to evaluate the ability to interpret spoken sentences of increasing length and complexity and select the picture that illustrates referential meaning of the sentences. Edison obtained a scaled score of 1. This scaled score in the very low range. 

Linguistic Concepts- The Linguistic Concepts subtest assessed Edison's ability to interpret spoken directions that contain basic concepts and identify mentioned objects from among several pictured choices. Edison obtained a scaled score of 5 and. This scaled score is in the low range. 

Word Structure - The Word Structure subtest is used to evaluate a child's knowledge of grammatical rules in a sentence-completion task. Edison was asked to complete a sentence that pertains to an illustration using the targeted word structures. Information from this subtest can help determine how Edison is acquiring the morphological rules of the English language. Edison obtained a scaled score of 5. This scaled score is in the low range. 

Word Classes- The Word Classes subtest evaluates the ability to understand and express relationships between words that are related by semantic class relationships. Edison was asked to choose the items that best represent the desired relationship. This subtest provides information on Edison's development of categorization skills and ability to associate word meanings. Edison obtained a scaled score of 7. This scaled score is in the borderline range. 








Oral Peripheral Observation: 

Informal assessment of the oral speech mechanism was performed through observation to assess the adequacy of the structures and functions of the oral-motor mechanism. Cursory observation revealed:

Structure - The face was observed to be symmetrical in shape. The mandible and maxilla were in proper alignment, height, shape, and size. At this time, Edison's oral structure was observed to be adequate for speech production.

Function - The body, trunk and facial tone were observed to be normal. All reflexes were inhibited (no observable reflexes when eating or performing verbal tasks). Phonation and breath support were adequate (1-3 seconds of sustained phonation), single voiced, nasal and un-voiced phonemes could be produced (/a/, /m/, and /h/). Jaw movements were significant for an occasional open mouth posture. Jaw stability is important for speech as it allows the tongue and lips to move independently to produce speech in a quick and efficient manner. In the area of Labial-Facial Control, Flaccid cheeks were noted due to underuse of the musculature. Furthermore, lip movements show decreased access/control to contact (medial one third of labial surface) as evident by difficulty with individual lip movement. Labial facial muscle movements were significant for decreased retraction and protrusion. In the area of Lingual Control (tongue) in connected speech, decreased tongue tip and body access/control was noted as evident by reduced precision of the tongue when articulating lingual sounds. Overall, facial muscles were observed to have decreased combined alternate movements and coordinated functioning. As a result, accumulation of saliva in the corners of mouth was noted.


Articulation/Phonology: 

The ability to produce speech sounds was assessed throughout the course of the evaluation in order to measure articulation of sounds and determine types of misarticulation. The Clinical Assessment of Articulation and Phonology - 2nd Edition (CAAP-2) was administered. Additionally, spontaneous speech was elicited both in words and connected speech. Data was collected and analyzed using the Age of Customary Consonant Production chart as recommended by The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). The acquisition of speech sounds is a developmental process and children often demonstrate "typical" errors and phonological patterns during this acquisition period. Developmentally appropriate error patterns were taken into consideration during assessment of speech sounds in order to differentiate typical errors from those that are not.  

Based on Edison's chronological age at the time of the assessment, the following relevant substitutions, distortions, and omissions were noted:

ErrorExample
substitution of /t/ for /d/ in final position of words secondary to weak tongue tip elevation 
/bet/ for /bed/
/ret/ for /red/

Inconsistent fronting of /k/ and /g/
/dot/ for /dog/
/date/ for /gate/
/flat/ for /flag/
/snate/ for /snake/
/swint/ for /swing/ 
/tomputer/ for /computer/
/helitopter/ for /helicopter/

Substitution of /f/ for /v/ 
/hife/ for /hive/

Inconsistent substitution of /f/ for /p/
/sheef/ for /sheep/

Decreased labial facial rounding for /sh/ and /ch/
/sheep/ 
/cheese/
Omission of vocalic /r/
/ja/ for /jar/

Inconsistent omission and distortion of /l/ 
/schoo/ for /school/

In addition, various inconsistent errors of sounds were noted in sequenced movements in spontaneous speech as a result of difficulty moving oral motor musculature appropriately during connected speech, difficulty with combined alternative movements of the facial muscles, and poor integration of jaw, lips, and cheek movements to support development of lingual control:
* /pik/ for /pig/
* Inconsistent substitution of /Ɵ/ for /s/
* Weak production of /z/ in /zoo/
* /wep/ for /web/ 
* /flove/ for /glove/
* inconsistent omissions and substitutions of sounds in multisyllabic words

The following errors were found to be developmentally appropriate at this time, but should be monitored based on chronological age and sound development:

ErrorExample
Substitution of for /Ɵ/ (voiceless th)
/teef/ for /teeth/
/fumb/ for /thumb/

Substitution of /d/ or /v/ for /th/ (voiced)
/dem/ for /them/
/bave/ for /bathe/

Furthermore, various inconsistent distortions, deletions, substitutions, and unintelligible utterances were noted in sequenced movements in spontaneous speech as a result of difficulty moving oral motor musculature appropriately during connected speech. Poor integration of jaw movements to support development of lingual control and decreased tongue tip elevation were observed. As well as, decreased access/control to contact (medial one third of labial surface) and decreased labial facial rounding and retracting. 

Overall, these errors affected Edison's overall intelligibility at the single word level and conversational level. Intelligibility in connected speech was judged to be fair to poor. It was difficult for an unfamiliar listener to understand Edison's utterances more than 50% of the time. Edison appeared to be aware of communication difficulties. When he was asked to repeat what said, he would attempt to rephrase his utterance or try to better articulate the word. It was difficult to understand most of the time without relying on context clues and/or gestures.

Speech-Language Sample: 

A language sample was observed in order to evaluate spontaneous speech and obtain more information about Edison's language skills in a less structured environment. A speech-language sample can help identify the types of speech-language behaviors in a child's repertoire and provides an enhanced overview of speech-language development. The speech-language sample was collected informally through play and observed for semantic, syntactic, morphological, and pragmatic language abilities using the Preschool Language Scale (PLS-5) Language Sample Checklist. The following was observed:

Edison demonstrated several strengths in his speech and language abilities. He was able to combine 3-4 words in spontaneous speech and showed strong social language use throughout the evaluation. Edison successfully used gestures or words to direct attention, request actions from the clinician, and attract attention. He was able to engage in conversation, talking about what he was doing, naming objects, playing with the clinician, and asking questions. Edison was also observed to talk about recent experiences, maintain a conversation, and stay on topic. When communication breakdowns occurred, he attempted to repair them by repeating or rewording his message.

However, Edison exhibited several areas of difficulty. His speech often consisted of incomplete phrases with improper grammar, and his conversational speech was disorganized. At times, when he could not find the words, he would mumble. Although he was able to produce 3-4 word combinations, the phrases were not grammatically correct, and his attempts to use more complex or extended utterances led to a noticeable decrease in intelligibility. Edison was not observed to use more advanced sentence structures during conversation, and his language structure was inconsistent. He had difficulty using proper tense markers, pronouns, plurals, possessive markers, articles, and negatives.

Edison's language content was primarily focused on naming objects and using action words, but he struggled with using words that denote possession, recurrence, time, and place. Additionally, he inconsistently used descriptive words or words that explain reasoning. While his social language use was an area of strength, his overall speech intelligibility and the disorganization of his phrases negatively impacted his ability to communicate effectively, resulting in frequent communication breakdowns. Although his connected speech was generally on topic, it was often disorganized and presented in an out-of-sequence manner. Overall, Edison's speech intelligibility was observed to be poor.

Overall, information obtained from the speech-language sample revealed that Edison's language skills in conversation were consistent with results obtained from the administration of formal assessment measures. 


Impressions

Based on the results of formal and informal assessment, as well as, parent interview and clinical observation, Edison, a 5-year, 1-month-old male presents with a moderate delay in overall speech, language, and communication skills. 

It is important to note that longer-term impressions about Edison's development potential based on these test results cannot be made at this time. The results of this assessment should be interpreted in terms of relative strengths and weakness so that they may be addressed through intervention. Future assessments may yield different results. These results may be higher or lower due to a variety of intervening factors. 

Based on the results from this evaluation, Edison's age, family and school support, as well as, adherence to recommendations that follow, prognosis for improved communication skills is favorable.


Recommendations

Based on the information obtained through the assessment tools and observation, the following recommendations are made:

1. Individual speech-language therapy 3 times a week for minutes to improve overall language skills.
2. Goals should be reviewed and updated monthly and a re-evaluation is recommended in 6 months to evaluate progress.
3. Implement at home activities focusing on goals targeted in therapy.
4. Continue to monitor overall development and refer to other specialist as deemed necessary (e.g. occupational therapy, tutor, etc.)

It has been a pleasure meeting and working with Edison and his family. If you have any questions and/or concerns feel free to contact me directly via telephone at (786) 622-2353 or via email at info@iplcmiami.com.

Sincerely,


Clinical Director
Speech-Language Pathologist






4
Grant Prado, Edison







